
	
		Redakcijski prečišćen tekst
	
	 
	Na osnovu člana 112. stav 1. tačka 2. Ustava Republike Srbije, donosim
	UКAZ
	o proglašenju Zakona o potvrđivanju Кonvencije o izvođenju dokaza u inostranstvu u građanskim 
	i trgovačkim stvarima
	Proglašava se Zakon o o potvrđivanju Кonvencije o izvođenju dokaza u inostranstvu u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima, koji je donela Narodna skupština Republike Srbije na Drugoj sednici Prvog redovnog zasedanja u 2010. godini, 5. maja 2010. godine.
	PR broj 72
	U Beogradu, 17. maja 2010. godine
	Predsednik Republike,
	Boris Tadić, 
	s.r.
	
	ZAКON
	o potvrđivanju Кonvencije o izvođenju 
	dokaza u inostranstvu u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima
	
	"Službeni glasnik RS - Međunarodni ugovori", br. 1 od 21. maja 2010, 13 od 
	27. novembra 2013.
	
	Član 1.
	Potvrđuje se Кonvencija o izvođenju dokaza u inostranstvu u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima, koja je sačinjena u Hagu 18. marta 1970. godine, u originalu na engleskom i francuskom jeziku.
	Član 2.
	Tekst Кonvencije u originalu na engleskom jeziku i u prevodu na srpski jezik glasi: 
	
	CONVENTION ON THE TAKING OF EVIDENCE ABROAD IN CIVIL OR COMMERCIAL MATTERS
	(Concluded 18 March 1970)
	(Entered into force 7 October 1972)
	The States signatory to the present Convention,
	Desiring to facilitate the transmission and execution of Letters of Request and to further the accommodation of the different methods which they use for this purpose,
	Desiring to improve mutual judicial co-operation in civil or commercial matters,
	Have resolved to conclude a Convention to this effect and have agreed upon the following provisions:
	CHAPTER I – LETTERS OF REQUEST
	Article 1.
	In civil or commercial matters a judicial authority of a Contracting State may, in accordance with the provisions of the law of that State, request the competent authority of another Contracting State, by means of a Letter of Request, to obtain evidence, or to perform some other judicial act.
	A Letter shall not be used to obtain evidence which is not intended for use in judicial proceedings, commenced or contemplated.
	The expression “other judicial act” does not cover the service of judicial documents or the issuance of any process by which judgments or orders are executed or enforced, or orders for provisional or protective measures.
	Article 2.
	A Contracting State shall designate a Central Authority which will undertake to receive Letters of Request coming from a judicial authority of another Contracting State and to transmit them to the authority competent to execute them. Each State shall organize the Central Authority in accordance with its own law.
	Letters shall be sent to the Central Authority of the State of execution without being transmitted through any other authority of that State.
	Article 3.
	A Letter of Request shall specify-
	a) the authority requesting its execution and the authority requested to execute it, if known to the requesting authority;
	b) the names and addresses of the parties to the proceedings and their representatives, if any;
	c) the nature of the proceedings for which the evidence is required, giving all necessary information in regard thereto;
	d) the evidence to be obtained or other judicial act to be performed.
	Where appropriate, the Letter shall specify, inter alia 
	–
	e) the names and addresses of the persons to be examined;
	f) the questions to be put to the persons to be examined or a statement of the subject-matter about which they are to be examined;
	g) the documents or other property, real or personal, to be inspected;
	h) any requirement that the evidence is to be given on oath or affirmation, and any special form to be used;
	i) any special method or procedure to be followed under Article 9.
	A Letter may also mention any information necessary for the application of Article 11.
	No legalization or other like formality may be required.
	Article 4.
	A Letter of Request shall be in the language of the authority requested to execute it or be accompanied by a translation into that language.
	Nevertheless, a Contracting State shall accept a Letter in either English or French, or a translation into one of these languages, unless it has made the reservation authorized by Article 33.
	A Contracting State which has more than one official language and cannot, for reasons of internal law, accept Letters in one of these languages for the whole of its territory, shall, by declaration, specify the language in which the Letter or translation thereof shall be expressed for execution in the specified parts of its territory. In case of failure to comply with this declaration, without justifiable excuse, the costs of translation into the required language shall be borne by the State of origin.
	A Contracting State may, by declaration, specify the language or languages other than those referred to in the preceding paragraphs, in which a Letter may be sent to its Central Authority.
	Any translation accompanying a Letter shall be certified as correct, either by a diplomatic officer or consular agent or by a sworn translator or by any other person so authorized in either State.
	Article 5.
	If the Central Authority considers that the request does not comply with the provisions of the present Convention, it shall promptly inform the authority of the State of origin which transmitted the Letter of Request, specifying the objections to the Letter.
	Article 6.
	If the authority to whom a Letter of Request has been transmitted is not competent to execute it, the Letter shall be sent forthwith to the authority in the same State which is competent to execute it in accordance with the provisions of its own law.
	Article 7.
	The requesting authority shall, if it so desires, be informed of the time when, and the place where, the proceedings will take place, in order that the parties concerned, and their representatives, if any, may be present. This information shall be sent directly to the parties or their representatives when the authority of the State of origin so requests.
	Article 8.
	A Contracting State may declare that members of the judicial personnel of the requesting authority of another Contracting State may be present at the execution of a Letter of Request. Prior authorization by the competent authority designated by the declaring State may be required.
	Article 9.
	The judicial authority which executes a Letter of Request shall apply its own law as to the methods and procedures to be followed.
	However, it will follow a request of the requesting authority that a special method or procedure be followed, unless this is incompatible with the internal law of the State of execution or is impossible of performance by reason of its internal practice and procedure or by reason of practical difficulties.
	A Letter of Request shall be executed expeditiously.
	Article 10.
	In executing a Letter of Request the requested authority shall apply the appropriate measures of compulsion in the instances and to the same extent as are provided by its internal law for the execution of orders issued by the authorities of its own country or of requests made by parties in internal proceedings.
	Article 11.
	In the execution of a Letter of Request the person concerned may refuse to give evidence in so far as he has a privilege or duty to refuse to give the evidence –
	a) under the law of the State of execution; or
	b) under the law of the State of origin, and the privilege or duty has been specified in the Letter, or, at the instance of the requested authority, has been otherwise confirmed to that authority by the requesting authority.
	A Contracting State may declare that, in addition, it will respect privileges and duties existing under the law of States other than the State of origin and the State of execution, to the extent specified in that declaration.
	Article 12.
	The execution of a Letter of Request may be refused only to the extent that –
	a) in the State of execution the execution of the Letter does not fall within the functions of the judiciary; or
	b) the State addressed considers that its sovereignty or security would be prejudiced thereby.
	Execution may not be refused solely on the ground that under its internal law the State of execution claims exclusive jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the action or that its internal law would not admit a right of action on it.
	Article 13.
	The documents establishing the execution of the Letter of Request shall be sent by the requested authority to the requesting authority by the same channel which was used by the latter.
	In every instance where the Letter is not executed in whole or in part, the requesting authority shall be informed immediately through the same channel and advised of the reasons.
	Article 14.
	The execution of the Letter of Request shall not give rise to any reimbursement of taxes or costs of any nature.
	Nevertheless, the State of execution has the right to require the State of origin to reimburse the fees paid to experts and interpreters and the costs occasioned by the use of a special procedure requested by the State of origin under Article 9, paragraph 2.
	The requested authority whose law obliges the parties themselves to secure evidence, and which is not able itself to execute the Letter, may, after having obtained the consent of the requesting authority, appoint a suitable person to do so. When seeking this consent the requested authority shall indicate the approximate costs which would result from this procedure. If the requesting authority gives its consent it shall reimburse any costs incurred; without such consent the requesting authority shall not be liable for the costs.
	CHAPTER II – TAKING OF EVIDENCE BY DIPLOMATIC OFFICERS, CONSULAR AGENTS AND COMMISSIONERS
	Article 15.
	In civil or commercial matters, a diplomatic officer or consular agent of a Contracting State may, in the territory of another Contracting State and within the area where he exercises his functions, take the evidence without compulsion of nationals of a State which he represents in aid of proceedings commenced in the courts of a State which he represents.
	A Contracting State may declare that evidence may be taken by a diplomatic officer or consular agent only if permission to that effect is given upon application made by him or on his behalf to the appropriate authority designated by the declaring State.
	Article 16.
	A diplomatic officer or consular agent of a Contracting State may, in the territory of another Contracting State and within the area where he exercises his functions, also take the evidence, without compulsion, of nationals of the State in which he exercises his functions or of a third State, in aid of proceedings commenced in the courts of a State which he represents, if –
	a) a competent authority designated by the State in which he exercises his functions has given its permission either generally or in the particular case, and
	b) he complies with the conditions which the competent authority has specified in the permission.
	A Contracting State may declare that evidence may be taken under this Article without its prior permission.
	Article 17.
	In civil or commercial matters, a person duly appointed as a commissioner for the purpose may, without compulsion, take evidence in the territory of a Contracting State in aid of proceedings commenced in the courts of another Contracting State, if –
	a) a competent authority designated by the State where the evidence is to be taken has given its permission either generally or in the particular case; and
	b) he complies with the conditions which the competent authority has specified in the permission.
	A Contracting State may declare that evidence may be taken under this Article without its prior permission.
	Article 18.
	A Contracting State may declare that a diplomatic officer, consular agent or commissioner authorized to take evidence under Articles 15, 16 or 17, may apply to the competent authority designated by the declaring State for appropriate assistance to obtain the evidence by compulsion. The declaration may contain such conditions as the declaring State may see fit to impose.
	If the authority grants the application it shall apply any measures of compulsion which are appropriate and are prescribed by its law for use in internal proceedings.
	Article 19.
	The competent authority, in giving the permission referred to in Articles 15, 16 or 17, or in granting the application referred to in Article 18, may lay down such conditions as it deems fit, 
	inter alia, as to the time and place of the taking of the evidence. Similarly it may require that it be given reasonable advance notice of the time, date and place of the taking of the evidence; in such a case a representative of the authority shall be entitled to be present at the taking of the evidence.
	Article 20.
	In the taking of evidence under any Article of this Chapter persons concerned may be legally represented.
	Article 21.
	Where a diplomatic officer, consular agent or commissioner is authorized under Articles 15, 16 or 17 to take evidence –
	a) he may take all kinds of evidence which are not incompatible with the law of the State where the evidence is taken or contrary to any permission granted pursuant to the above Articles, and shall have power within such limits to administer an oath or take an affirmation;
	b) a request to a person to appear or to give evidence shall, unless the recipient is a national of the State where the action is pending, be drawn up in the language of the place where the evidence is taken or be accompanied by a translation into such language;
	c) the request shall inform the person that he may be legally represented and, in any State that has not filed a declaration under Article 18, shall also inform him that he is not compelled to appear or to give evidence;
	d) the evidence may be taken in the manner provided by the law applicable to the court in which the action is pending provided that such manner is not forbidden by the law of the State where the evidence is taken;
	e) a person requested to give evidence may invoke the privileges and duties to refuse to give the evidence contained in Article 11.
	Article 22.
	The fact that an attempt to take evidence under the procedure laid down in this Chapter has failed, owing to the refusal of a person to give evidence, shall not prevent an application being subsequently made to take the evidence in accordance with Chapter I.
	CHAPTER III – GENERAL CLAUSES
	Article 23.
	A Contracting State may at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that it will not execute Letters of Request issued for the purpose of obtaining pre-trial discovery of documents as known in Common Law countries.
	Article 24.
	A Contracting State may designate other authorities in addition to the Central Authority and shall determine the extent of their competence. However, Letters of Request may in all cases be sent to the Central Authority.
	Federal States shall be free to designate more than one Central Authority.
	Article 25.
	A Contracting State which has more than one legal system may designate the authorities of one of such systems, which shall have exclusive competence to execute Letters of Request pursuant to this Convention.
	Article 26.
	A Contracting State, if required to do so because of constitutional limitations, may request the reimbursement by the State of origin of fees and costs, in connection with the execution of Letters of Request, for the service of process necessary to compel the appearance of a person to give evidence, the costs of attendance of such persons, and the cost of any transcript of the evidence.
	Where a State has made a request pursuant to the above paragraph, any other Contracting State may request from that State the reimbursement of similar fees and costs.
	Article 27.
	The provisions of the present Convention shall not prevent a Contracting State from –
	a) declaring that Letters of Request may be transmitted to its judicial authorities through channels other than those provided for in Article 2;
	b) permitting, by internal law or practice, any act provided for in this Convention to be performed upon less restrictive conditions;
	c) permitting, by internal law or practice, methods of taking evidence other than those provided for in this Convention.
	Article 28.
	The present Convention shall not prevent an agreement between any two or more Contracting States to derogate from –
	a) the provisions of Article 2 with respect to methods of transmitting Letters of Request;
	b) the provisions of Article 4 with respect to the languages which may be used;
	c) the provisions of Article 8 with respect to the presence of judicial personnel at the execution of Letters;
	d) the provisions of Article 11 with respect to the privileges and duties of witnesses to refuse to give evidence;
	e) the provisions of Article 13 with respect to the methods of returning executed Letters to the requesting authority;
	f) the provisions of Article 14 with respect to fees and costs;
	g) the provisions of Chapter II.
	Article 29.
	Between Parties to the present Convention who are also Parties to one or both of the Conventions on Civil Procedure signed at The Hague on the 17th of July 1905 and the 1st of March 1954, this Convention shall replace Articles 8-16 of the earlier Conventions.
	Article 30.
	The present Convention shall not affect the application of Article 23 of the Convention of 1905, or of Article 24 of the Convention of 1954.
	Article 31.
	Supplementary Agreements between Parties to the Conventions of 1905 and 1954 shall be considered as equally applicable to the present Convention unless the Parties have otherwise agreed.
	Article 32.
	Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 29 and 31, the present Convention shall not derogate from conventions containing provisions on the matters covered by this Convention to which the Contracting States are, or shall become Parties.
	Article 33.
	A State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession exclude, in whole or in part, the application of the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 4 and of Chapter II. No other reservation shall be permitted.
	Each Contracting State may at any time withdraw a reservation it has made; the reservation shall cease to have effect on the sixtieth day after notification of the withdrawal. When a State has made a reservation, any other State affected thereby may apply the same rule against the reserving State.
	Article 34.
	A State may at any time withdraw or modify a declaration.
	Article 35.
	A Contracting State shall, at the time of the deposit of its instrument of ratification or accession, or at a later date, inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands of the designation of authorities, pursuant to Articles 2, 8, 24 and 25.
	A Contracting State shall likewise inform the Ministry, where appropriate, of the following –
	a) the designation of the authorities to whom notice must be given, whose permission may be required, and whose assistance may be invoked in the taking of evidence by diplomatic officers and consular agents, pursuant to Articles 15, 16 and 18 respectively;
	b) the designation of the authorities whose permission may be required in the taking of evidence by commissioners pursuant to Article 17 and of those who may grant the assistance provided for in Article 18;
	c) declarations pursuant to Articles 4, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23 and 27;
	d) any withdrawal or modification of the above designations and declarations;
	e) the withdrawal of any reservation.
	Article 36.
	Any difficulties which may arise between Contracting States in connection with the operation of this Convention shall be settled through diplomatic channels.
	Article 37.
	The present Convention shall be open for signature by the States represented at the Eleventh Session of the Hague Conference on Private International Law.
	It shall be ratified, and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
	Article 38.
	The present Convention shall enter into force on the sixtieth day after the deposit of the third instrument of ratification referred to in the second paragraph of Article 37.
	The Convention shall enter into force for each signatory State which ratifies subsequently on the sixtieth day after the deposit of its instrument of ratification.
	Article 39.
	Any State not represented at the Eleventh Session of the Hague Conference on Private International Law which is a Member of this Conference or of the United Nations or of a specialized agency of that Organization, or a Party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice may accede to the present Convention after it has entered into force in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 38.
	The instrument of accession shall be deposited with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
	The Convention shall enter into force for a State acceding to it on the sixtieth day after the deposit of its instrument of accession.
	The accession will have effect only as regards the relations between the acceding State and such Contracting States as will have declared their acceptance of the accession. Such declaration shall be deposited at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands; this Ministry shall forward, through diplomatic channels, a certified copy to each of the Contracting States.
	The Convention will enter into force as between the acceding State and the State that has declared its acceptance of the accession on the sixtieth day after the deposit of the declaration of acceptance.
	Article 40.
	Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that the present Convention shall extend to all the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible, or to one or more of them. Such a declaration shall take effect on the date of entry into force of the Convention for the State concerned.
	At any time thereafter, such extensions shall be notified to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
	The Convention shall enter into force for the territories mentioned in such an extension on the sixtieth day after the notification indicated in the preceding paragraph.
	Article 41.
	The present Convention shall remain in force for five years from the date of its entry into force in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 38, even for States which have ratified it or acceded to it subsequently.
	If there has been no denunciation, it shall be renewed tacitly every five years.
	Any denunciation shall be notified to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands at least six months before the end of the five year period.
	It may be limited to certain of the territories to which the Convention applies.
	The denunciation shall have effect only as regards the State which has notified it. The Convention shall remain in force for the other Contracting States.
	Article 42.
	The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands shall give notice to the States referred to in Article 37, and to the States which have acceded in accordance with Article 39, of the following –
	a) the signatures and ratifications referred to in Article 37;
	b) the date on which the present Convention enters into force in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 38;
	c) the accessions referred to in Article 39 and the dates on which they take effect;
	d) the extensions referred to in Article 40 and the dates on which they take effect;
	e) the designations, reservations and declarations referred to in Articles 33 and 35;
	f) the denunciations referred to in the third paragraph of Article 41.
	In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed the present Convention.
	Done at The Hague, on the 18th day of March, 1970, in the English and French languages, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Government of the Netherlands, and of which a certified copy shall be sent, through the diplomatic channel, to each of the States represented at the Eleventh Session of the Hague Conference on Private International Law.
	КONVENCIJA
	O IZVOĐENJU DOКAZA U INOSTRANSTVU U GRAĐANSКIM I TRGOVAČКIM STVARIMA
	Države potpisnice ove Кonvencije u želji da olakšaju dostavljanje i izvršenje zamolnica i da unaprede usaglašavanje različitih načina koji se u te svrhe koriste, u želji da poboljšaju uzajamnu sudsku saradnju u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima, odlučile su da u tu svrhu zaključe Кonvenciju i složile su se o sledećim odredbama:
	Glava I
	ZAMOLNICE
	Član 1.
	U građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima sudski organ države ugovornice može se, u skladu sa svojim zakonodavstvom, obraćati nadležnom organu druge države ugovornice zamolnicom za pribavljanje dokaza ili sprovođenje druge sudske radnje.
	Ne može se zahtevati izvođenje dokaza koji nisu namenjeni za korišćenje u sudskom postupku koji se već vodi ili tek treba da bude pokrenut.
	Izraz „druge sudske radnje” ne obuhvata dostavljanje sudskih akata niti sprovođenje bilo kakvog postupka izvršenja presuda ili naredbi ili naredbi za privremene mere i mere obezbeđenja.
	Član 2.
	Svaka država ugovornica imenovaće centralni organ koji će biti zadužen da prima zamolnice koje potiču od sudskog organa druge države ugovornice i da ih dostavlja nadležnom organu radi izvršenja. Svaka država će organizovati centralni organ u skladu sa svojim zakonodavstvom.
	Zamolnice se dostavljaju centralnom organu zamoljene države bez posredovanja drugih organa te države.
	Član 3.
	Zamolnica treba da sadrži podatke o:
	a) organu države molilje i, ako mu je poznat, podatke o zamoljenom organu,
	b) imenima i adresi stranaka u postupku i, ako ih imaju, njihovih punomoćnika,
	c) prirodi postupka za koji se zahteva izvođenje dokaza sa svim potrebnim objašnjenjima u vezi sa tim sa kratkim pregledom činjeničnog stanja,
	d) izvođenju dokaza ili druge sudske radnje koju treba preduzeti.
	Zamolnica, ako je potrebno, sadrži i:
	e) imena i adrese lica koja treba saslušati,
	f) pitanja koja treba da budu postavljena licima koja će biti saslušana ili opis predmeta o kome treba da se saslušaju,
	g) dokumenta ili druge stvari, pokretne ili nepokretne, koje treba pregledati,
	h) zahtev da se dokazi izvedu pod zakletvom ili potvrđivanjem i da se sprovede neki poseban postupak,
	i) neki poseban metod ili postupak u skladu sa članom 9.
	Zamolnica može sadržati i podatke koji su potrebni radi primene člana 11.
	Ne može se zahtevati legalizacija ili slična formalnost.
	Član 4.
	Zamolnica se sastavlja na jeziku zamoljenog organa ili je propraćena sa prevodom na taj jezik.
	Pored toga, država ugovornica će prihvatiti zamolnicu sastavljenu na francuskom ili engleskom jeziku, ili sa prevodom na jedan od ovih jezika, ukoliko nije stavila rezervu u skladu sa članom 33.
	Svaka država ugovornica koja ima više od jednog službenog jezika, a prema svojim unutrašnjim propisima ne može da prima na celoj teritoriji zamolnice sastavljene na jednom od ovih jezika, će putem izjave precizirati na kom jeziku treba da budu sastavljene ili prevedene zamolnice koje treba da budu izvršene na pojedinim delovima njene teritorije. U slučaju postupanja koje nije u skladu sa izjavom, bez opravdanih razloga, troškove prevoda na odgovarajući jezik će snositi država molilja.
	Država ugovornica može, putem izjave, da odredi jezik, ili jezike, koji nisu predviđeni u prethodnim stavovima, na kojima zamolnica treba da bude upućena njenom centralnom organu.
	Svaki prevod upućen uz zamolnicu se overava kao pravilan od strane diplomatskog ili konzularnog predstavnika ili zakletog sudskog tumača ili od strane bilo kog drugog lica koje je za to ovlašćeno u jednnoj od država.
	Član 5.
	Ako centralni organ smatra da zamolnica nije u skladu sa odredbama Кonvencije, o tome bez odlaganja obaveštava organ države molilje koji je uputio zamolnicu, navodeći prigovore na zamolnicu.
	Član 6.
	Ukoliko državni organ kome je dostavljena zamolnica nije nadležan za postupanje po njoj, zamolnica će odmah biti dostavljena nadležnom organu iste države, u skladu sa njenim zakonodavstvom.
	Član 7.
	Organ molilac se obaveštava, ako je to tražio, o vremenu i mestu postupanja po zamolnici, kako bi zainteresovane stranke i njihovi punomoćnici, mogli tome da prisustvuju. Ovo obaveštenje se neposredno dostavlja strankama ili njihovim punomoćnicima, ako to zahteva organ države molilje.
	Član 8.
	Država ugovornica može izjaviti da sudski službenici države molilje mogu da prisustvuju izvršenju zamolnice. Zamoljena država može zahtevati prethodnu saglasnost koju daje nadležni organ koga je odredila.
	Član 9.
	Sudski organ postupa pri izvršenju zamolnice u skladu sa pravilima postupka koje predviđa pravo njegove države.
	Međutim, udovoljiće se zahtevu organa molioca da se postupi u posebnoj formi osim ako to nije u suprotnosti sa zakonodavstvom zamoljene države ili ako njena primena nije moguća u zamoljenoj državi zbog unutrašnje prakse i postupaka ili praktičnih teškoća.
	Zamolnica se izvršava po hitnom postupku.
	Član 10.
	Zamoljeni organ u postupku izvršenja zamolnice primenjuje odgovarajuća sredstva prinude u slučajevima i u istom obimu koja su predviđena njegovim unutrašnjim zakonodavstvom za izvršenje naredbi izdatih od organa njegove države ili zahteva postavljenih u tom cilju od zainteresovanih stranaka u unutrašnjim postupcima.
	Član 11.
	U izvršenju zamolnice lice na koje se ona odnosi može odbiti da svedoči ako ima pravo ili dužnost da odbije svedočenje na osnovu: 
	
	a) zakona zamoljene države,
	b) zakona države molilje a koja je pravo odbijanja i zabranu svedočenja posebno naznačila u zamolnici ili ih naknadno potvrdila na zahtev zamoljene vlasti.
	Osim toga, država ugovornica može izjaviti da priznaje prava i dužnosti koje predviđaju propisi drugih država koje nisu ni država molilja ni zamoljena država, u onoj meri u kojoj je to naznačeno u toj izjavi.
	Član 12.
	Izvršenje zamolnice može se odbiti ako:
	a) izvršenje takve zamolnice u zamoljenoj državi ne spada u sudsku nadležnost ili
	b) zamoljena država smatra da to utiče na njen suverenitet i njenu bezbednost.
	Izvršenje se ne može odbiti samo iz razloga što zakon zamoljene države predviđa isključivu sudsku nadležnost u toj stvari ili ne poznaje pravna sredstva koja odgovaraju predmetu zahteva koji upućuje organ države molilje.
	Član 13.
	Zamoljeni organ dostavlja dokumenta o izvršenju zamolnice organu države molilje istim putem koji je ovaj poslednji koristio.
	Кada zamolnici nije udovoljeno u celini ili delimično, zamoljena država će o tome bez odlaganja istim putem obavestiti državu molilju navodeći razloge za neudovoljenje.
	Član 14.
	Izvršenje zamolnica ne povlači naplatu taksa, niti troškova bilo koje vrste. 
	
	Međutim, zamoljena država ima pravo da od države molilje zahteva naknadu troškova za veštake i tumače, kao i troškove koji nastanu u vezi primene posebnog postupka koji je, shodno članu 9. stav 2. zatražila država molilja. 
	
	Zamoljeni organ, čiji zakon prepušta strankama brigu oko obezbeđenja dokaza, a koji nije u mogućnosti da sam postupi po zamolnici, može da zaduži za to ovlašćeno lice, pošto dobije pristanak organa molioca. Zahtevajući ovaj pristanak, zamoljeni organ naznačuje približni iznos troškova koji će nastati prilikom izvršenja ove radnje. Pristanak uključuje obavezu države molilje da nadoknadi ove troškove, a bez tog pristanka, organ države molilje nije dužan da pokrije nastale troškove.
	Glava II
	PRIBAVLJANJE DOКAZA OD STRANE DIPLOMATSКIH ILI КONZULARNIH PREDSTAVNIКA I OD STRANE 
	PUNOMOĆNIКA
	Član 15.
	Diplomatski ili konzularni predstavnik jedne strane ugovornice može, u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima, na teritoriji druge strane ugovornice i u okviru svog jurisdikcionog područja da izvodi dokaze prema državljanima države koju predstavlja u vezi sa postupkom koji se vodi pred sudom države koju on predstavlja bez primene prinude.
	Država ugovornica može izjaviti da se izvođenje dokaza od strane diplomatskog ili konzularnog predstavnika može izvršavati tek kada se dobije odobrenje koje, na zahtev podnet od strane diplomatskog ili konzularnog predstavnika ili u njegovo ime, izdaje nadležni organ određen od strane države koja daje izjavu.
	Član 16.
	Diplomatski ili konzularni predstavnik jedne države ugovornice može, na teritoriji druge države ugovornice i u okviru svog jurisdikcionog područja, da bez primene sile izvodi dokaze za potrebe postupka koji se vodi pred sudom države koju on predstavlja i kad su u pitanju državljani države prijema ili treće države:
	a) ako je nadležni organ, određen od strane države prijema, dao svoju dozvolu bilo uopšte, bilo za svaki slučaj posebno i
	b) ako predstavnik poštuje uslove koje je u dozvoli utvrdio nadležni organ.
	Svaka država ugovornica može izjaviti da je izvođenje dokaza prema odredbama ovog člana moguće i bez njene prethodne dozvole.
	Član 17.
	Svako lice koje je u tu svrhu punovažno naimenovano za punomoćnika može, na teritoriji jedne države ugovornice, u građanskim i trgovačkim stvarima da, bez primene sile, izvodi dokaze za potrebe postupka koji se vodi pred sudom druge države ugovornice:
	a) ako je nadležni organ određen od strane države u kojoj treba da se izvedu dokazi dao svoju dozvolu bilo uopšte, bilo za svaki slučaj posebno i
	b) ako to lice poštuje uslove koje je u dozvoli utvrdio nadležni organ.
	Svaka država ugovornica može izjaviti da je izvođenje dokaza prema odredbama ovog člana moguće i bez njene prethodne dozvole.
	Član 18.
	Svaka država ugovornica može izjaviti da diplomatski ili konzularni predstavnik ili punomoćnik, koji su ovlašćeni da u skladu sa čl. 15, 16. i 17. izvodi dokaze, ima pravo da se obrati nadležnom organu kojeg je odredila ta država, za pomoć potrebnu za izvršenje tog akta prinudnim putem. Ta izjava države može da sadrži takve uslove koje država koja je daje smatra odgovarajućim.
	Ako nadležni organ udovolji zahtevu, on će primeniti odgovarajuće mere prinude koje predviđa njegovo zakonodavstvo u unutrašnjim postupcima.
	Član 19.
	Nadležni organ može, ako daje dozvolu prema čl. 15, 16. i 17. ili ako udovoljava zahtevu prema članu 18, da utvrdi uslove koje on smatra svrsishodnim, posebno u vezi sa vremenom i mestom izvođenja dokaza. On može takođe da zahteva da bude blagovremeno prethodno obavešten o vremenu i mestu; u tom slučaju predstavnik tog organa je ovlašćen da bude prisutan prilikom izvođenja dokaza.
	Član 20.
	U postupku izvođenja dokaza predviđenog u ovoj glavi, zainteresovana lica mogu biti pravno zastupana.
	Član 21.
	Кada je diplomatski ili konzularni predstavnik ili punomoćnik ovlašćen da na osnovu čl. 15, 16. i 17. izvodi dokaze:
	a) može da izvodi sve dokaze koji nisu u suprotnosti sa zakonom države u kojoj se izvode ili nisu u suprotnosti sa dozvolom izdatom na osnovu pomenutih članova, a takođe može, pod istim uslovima, da primi iskaz pod zakletvom,
	b) zahtev za lice da učestvuje u izvođenju dokaza sačinjava na jeziku mesta izvođenja dokaza ili se uz njega prilaže prevod na taj jezik, osim ako lice na koje se odnosi izvođenje dokaza nije državljanin države u kojoj se izvodi dokaz,
	c) u zahtevu se navodi da lice može da angažuje pravnog savetnika, a u svakoj državi koja nije dala izjavu u smislu člana 18. i da ono nije obavezno da se pojavi pred sudom niti učestvuje u izvođenju dokaza,
	d) dokazi mogu da se izvode na jedan od načina koje predviđaju propisi države pred čijim sudom se vodi postupak, osim ako pravo države u kojoj se izvode dokazi zabranjuje tu formu,
	e) lice od koga se traži svedočenje može se pozvati na pravo i obavezu da odbije svedočenje u skladu sa članom 11.
	Član 22.
	Činjenica da pokušaj izvođenja dokaza u skladu sa odredbama ove glave nije proveden zbog odbijanja nekog lica da svedoči, ne isključuje mogućnost da zamolnica za izvođenje dokaza bude kasnije upućena, u skladu sa odredbama glave I.
	Glava III
	OPŠTE ODREDBE
	Član 23.
	Država ugovornica može, u trenutku potpisivanja, potvrđivanja ili pristupanja, izjaviti da neće izvršavati zamolnice koje imaju za predmet postupak poznat u državama običajnog prava pod nazivom „pre-trial discovery of documents”.
	Član 24.
	Država ugovornica može, pored centralnog organa, da odredi druge organe utvrđujući njihovu nadležnost. Međutim, zamolnice se uvek mogu dostavljati centralnom organu.
	Federalne države su slobodne da odrede više centralnih organa.
	Član 25.
	Država ugovornica koja ima više pravnih sistema, može da odredi organe jednog od ovih sistema koji će isključivo biti nadležni za izvršenje zamolnica u skladu sa ovom Кonvencijom.
	Član 26.
	Država ugovornica, ako je na to obavezna zbog ustavnih ograničenja, može da zatraži od države molilje da naknadi honorare i troškove za sprovođenje postupka za prinudno dovođenje lica radi svedočenja, za troškove pristupanja tog lica i za troškove izrade zapisnika o izvođenju dokaza.
	Кada je jedna država podnela zahtev u skladu sa odredbama prethodnog stava, svaka druga država ugovornica može zahtevati od te države da naknadi slične troškove.
	Član 27.
	Odredbe ove Кonvencije ne sprečavaju da jedna država ugovornica:
	a) izjavi da zamolnice mogu dostavljati njenim sudskim organima na način koji nije predviđen članom 2,
	b) dopusti, u skladu sa svojim zakonom ili sa praksom, da se izvrši bilo koja radnja za koju je ovom Кonvencijom predviđeno da se izvrši u manje ograničavajućim uslovima,
	c) dopusti, u skladu sa svojim zakonom ili praksom, i druge metode izvođenja dokaza koji nisu predviđeni ovom Кonvencijom.
	Član 28.
	Ova Кonvencija ne sprečava da se sporazumom dveju ili više država ugovornica odstupi od:
	a) člana 2. po pitanju načina dostavljanja zamolnica,
	b) člana 4. po pitanju upotrebe jezika,
	c) člana 8. po pitanju prisustva sudskih službenika prilikom izvršenja zamolnica,
	d) člana 11. po pitanju odbijanja svedočenja,
	e) člana 13. po pitanju dostavljanja isprava kojima se konstatuje izvršenje,
	f) člana 14. po pitanju regulisanja troškova,
	g) odredaba glave II.
	Član 29.
	Između država članica ove Кonvencije koje su, takođe, članice jedne ili obe 
	
	Кonvencije o građanskom postupku potpisane u Hagu 17. jula 1905. i
	
	1. marta 1954. godine, ova Кonvencija će zameniti odredbe čl. 8. do 16. ranijih Кonvencija.
	Član 30.
	Ovom Кonvencijom ne dira se u primenu člana 23. Кonvencije iz 1905. niti člana 24. Кonvencije iz 1954. godine.
	Član 31.
	Dopunski sporazumi između država članica Кonvencija iz 1905. i 1954. godine koje su sklopile države ugovornice i dalje se primenjuju pored ove Кonvencije osim ako se zainteresovane države drugačije ne dogovore.
	Član 32.
	Ne dirajući u primenu čl. 29. i 31. ova Кonvencija neće ograničiti primenu konvencija čiji su članovi države ugovornice ili će biti članovi, a koje sadrže odredbe o pravnoj materiji koju reguliše ova Кonvencija.
	Član 33.
	Svaka država može, u trenutku potpisivanja ili predaje ratifikacionog ili instrumenta o postupanju isključiti potpuno ili delimično primenu odredaba stava 2. člana 4, kao i glave II. Nijedna druga rezerva nije dopuštena.
	Svaka država ugovornica može, u svakom trenutku da povuče rezervu koju je učinila; dejstvo rezerve prestaje šestdesetog dana posle sopštenja o povlačenju.
	Кada jedna država učini rezervu, svaka druga država pogođena ovom rezervom može da primeni isto protiv države koja je učinila rezervu.
	Član 34.
	Svaka država može u svako doba da povuče ili promeni izjavu.
	Član 35.
	Svaka država ugovornica naznačuje Ministarstvu inostranih poslova Holandije, bilo u trenutku deponovanja svog instrumenta o ratifikaciji ili pristupanju bilo naknadno, organe koji su predviđeni u čl. 2, 8, 24. i 25. 
	
	Država ugovornica će na isti način obavestiti Ministarstvo, ako se ukaže potreba, o sledećem:
	a) o organima kojima se mora dostaviti obaveštenje, od kojih se može tražiti odobrenje i od kojih se može zatražiti pomoć pri izvođenju dokaza od strane diplomatskih ili konzularnih predstavnika u skladu sa čl. 15, 16. i 18,
	b) o organima koji su određeni i koji mogu punomoćniku dati dozvolu za izvođenje dokaza predviđenu u članu 17. ili pružiti pomoć predviđenu u članu 18,
	c) o izjavi u skladu sa čl. 4, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23. i 27,
	d) o svakom povlačenju ili promeni gore pomenutih imenovanja i izjava,
	e) o svakom povlačenju rezervi.
	Član 36.
	Bilo koje teškoće koje bi nastale između država ugovornica prilikom primene ove Кonvencije rešavaće se diplomatskim putem.
	Član 37.
	Ova Кonvencija otvorena je za potpisivanje državama predstavljenim na 11. zasedanju Haške konferencije za međunarodno privatno pravo.
	Ona podleže potvrđivanju i ratifikacioni instrumenti se deponuju kod Ministarstva inostranih poslova Holandije.
	Član 38.
	Ova Кonvencija stupa na snagu šezdesetog dana računajući od dana deponovanja trećeg instrumenta potvrđivanja predviđenog članom 37. stav 2.
	Za svaku državu potpisnicu koja kasnije potvrdi, Кonvencija stupa na snagu šezdesetog dana računajući od dana deponovanja njenog instrumenta potvrđivanja.
	Član 39.
	Svaka država koja nije predstavljena na 11. zasedanju Haške konferencije za međunarodno privatno pravo, a član je Кonferencije ili Ujedinjenih nacija ili neke njene specijalizovane ustanove ili članica Statuta Međunarodnog suda pravde, može pristupiti ovoj Кonvenciji posle njenog stupanja na snagu, na osnovu člana 38. stav 1.
	Instrument o pristupanju deponuje se kod Ministarstva inostranih poslova Holandije.
	Кonvencija stupa na snagu za državu koja pristupa šezdesetog dana računajući od dana deponovanja njenog instrumenta o pristupanju.
	Pristupanje važi samo u odnosima između između države koja pristupa i država ugovornica koje su izjavile da prihvataju ovo pristupanje. Ova izjava se deponuje kod Ministarstva inostranih poslova Holandije, koje diplomatskim putem dostavlja svim državama ugovornicama po jednu overenu kopiju ove izjave.
	Кonvencija stupa na snagu između države koja je pristupila i države koja je izjavila da ovo pristupanje prihvata šezdesetog dana računajući od dana deponovanja izjave o prihvatanju.
	Član 40.
	Svaka država, u trenutku potpisivanja, potvrđivanja ili pristupanja može da izjavi da se ova Кonvencija odnosi na sve teritorije koje ona predstavlja na međunarodnom planu ili na jednu ili više njih. Ova izajava postaje važeća u trenutku stupanja na snagu Кonvencije u odnosu na pomenutu državu. 
	
	Svako proširenje ove vrste saopštava se Ministarstvu inostranih poslova Holandije.
	Кonvencija stupa na snagu za teritorije pomenute u saopštenju, šezdesetog dana računajući od datuma saopštenja pomenutog u prethodnom stavu.
	Član 41.
	Ova Кonvencija važi pet godina računajući od dana njenog stupanja na snagu, u skladu sa članom 38. stav 1. čak i za države koje je budu potvrdile ili joj docnije pristupile.
	Кonvencija se prećutno produžava svakih pet godina osim ako bude otkazana.
	Otkaz se, najmanje šest meseci pre isteka roka od pet godina, saopštava Ministarstvu inostranih poslova Holandije.
	Otkaz može da se ograniči na neke od teritorija na koje se primenjuje Кonvencija.
	Otkaz ima dejstvo samo za one države koje ga budu saopštile. Кonvencija ostaje na snazi za ostale države ugovornice.
	Član 42.
	Ministarstvo inostranih poslova Holandije saopštava državama pomenutim u članu 37, kao i državama koje pristupe u skladu sa odredbama člana 39:
	a) potpisivanje i potvrđivanje pomenuto u članu 37,
	b) datum kada Кonvencija stupa na snagu u skladu sa odredbama člana 38,
	c) pristupanja pomenuta u članu 39. i datum od kada imaju dejstvo,
	d) proširenja pomenuta u članu 40. i datum od kada imaju dejstvo,
	e) imenovanja, rezerve i izjave navedene u čl. 33. i 35,
	f) otkaz pomenut u članu 41. stav 3.
	Ova Кonvencija je potpisana od strane potpisnika koji su za to bili punovažno ovlašćeni.
	Sačinjeno u Hagu dana 18. marta 1970. na francuskom i engleskom jeziku čija su oba teksta podjednako verodostojna, u jednom primerku koji će biti deponovan u arhivi Holandije i čija overena kopija će biti dostavljena, diplomatskim putem, svim državama predstavljenim na Jedanaestom zasedanju Haške konferencije za međunarodno privatno pravo.
	Član 3.
	Prilikom predavanja ratifikacionog instrumenta Republika Srbija će dati sledeću izjavu:
	„Republika Srbija izjavljuje:
	a) Republika Srbija se protivi primeni člana 4. stav 2. Кonvencije.
	b) U skladu sa članom 8. Кonvencije, sudski službenici države molilje mogu u Republici Srbiji prisustvovati izvršenju zamolnice po pribavljenom odobrenju ministarstva nadležnog za pravosuđe. 
	
	v) U skladu sa članom 35. Кonvencije, Republika Srbija izjavljuje da se izvođenje dokaza u skladu sa čl. 16. i 17. Кonvencije može vršiti samo po prethodno pribavljenom odobrenju ministarstva nadležnog za pravosuđe. 
	
	g) U skladu sa članom 18. Кonvencije diplomatski ili konzularni predstavnici ili punomoćnici koji su ovlašćeni da u Republici Srbiji izvode dokaze u skladu sa čl. 15, 16. i 17. Кonvencije mogu zatražiti pomoć u izvođenju dokaza uz upotrebu prinude. Nadležni organ za sprovođenje člana 18. Кonvencije je osnovni sud u Republici Srbiji na čijem području lice ima prebivalište ili boravište.”.
	Član 4.
	Ministarstvo pravde i državne uprave* se određuje kao centralni organ u skladu sa članom 2. Кonvencije.
	*Službeni glasnik RS - Međunarodni ugovori, 
	broj 13/2013
	Član 5.
	Ovaj zakon stupa na snagu osmog dana od dana objavljivanja u „Službenom glasniku Republike Srbije – Međunarodni ugovori”.
