


	
	Zakon


	
	Na osnovu člana 112. stav 1. tačka 2. Ustava Republike Srbije, donosim
	UКAZ
	o proglašenju Zakona o potvrđivanju Četvrtog dodatnog protokola uz Evropsku konvenciju o ekstradiciji
	Proglašava se Zakon o potvrđivanju Četvrtog dodatnog protokola uz Evropsku 
	konvenciju o ekstradiciji, koji je donela Narodna skupština Republike Srbije 
	na Četvrtoj sednici Drugog redovnog zasedanja u 2013. godini, 26. novembra 
	2013. godine
	
	PR broj 120
	U Beogradu, 27. novembra 2013. godine
	Predsednik Republike,
	Tomislav Nikolić, 
	s.r.
	
	ZAКON
	o potvrđivanju Četvrtog dodatnog protokola uz Evropsku konvenciju o ekstradiciji
	
	"Službeni glasnik RS - Međunarodni ugovori", broj 13 od 27. novembra 2013.
	
	Član 1.
	Potvrđuje se Četvrti dodatni protokol uz Evropsku konvenciju o ekstradiciji, sačinjen 20. septembra 2012. godine u Beču, u originalu na engleskom i francuskom jeziku.
	Član 2.
	Tekst Protokola u originalu na engleskom jeziku i u prevodu na srpski jezik glasi:
	„FOURTH ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON EXTRADITION
	Vienna, 20.IX.2012
	The member States of the Council of Europe, signatory to this Protocol,
	Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve greater unity between its members;
	Desirous of strengthening their individual and collective ability to respond to crime;
	Having regard to the provisions of the European Convention on Extradition (ETS No. 24) opened for signature in Paris on 13 December 1957 (hereinafter referred to as “the Convention”), as well as the three Additional Protocols thereto (ETS Nos. 86 and 98, CETS No.209), done at Strasbourg on 15 October 1975, on 17March 1978 and on 10 November 2010, respectively; 
	
	Considering it desirable to modernise a number of provisions of the Convention and supplement it in certain respects, taking into account the evolution of international co-operation in criminal matters since the entry into force of the Convention and the Additional Protocols thereto; 
	
	Have agreed as follows:
	Article 1 – Lapse of time
	Article 10 of the Convention shall be replaced by the following provisions:
	“Lapse of time
	1 Extradition shall not be granted when the prosecution or punishment of the person claimed has become statute-barred according to the law of the requesting Party.
	2 Extradition shall not be refused on the ground that the prosecution or punishment of the person claimed would be statute-barred according to the law of the requested Party.
	3 Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, declare that it reserves the right not to apply paragraph2:
	a when the request for extradition is based on offences for which that State has jurisdiction under its own criminal law; and/or
	b if its domestic legislation explicitly prohibits extradition when the prosecution or punishment of the person claimed would be statute-barred according to its law.
	4 When determining whether prosecution or punishment of the person sought would be statute-barred according to its law, any Party having made a reservation pursuant to paragraph 3 of this article shall take into consideration, in accordance with its law, any acts or events that have occurred in the requesting Party, in so far as acts or events of the same nature have the effect of interrupting or suspending time-limitation in the requested Party.”
	Article 2 – The request and supporting documents
	1 Article 12 of the Convention shall be replaced by the following provisions:
	“The request and supporting documents
	1 The request shall be in writing. It shall be submitted by the Ministry of Justice or other competent authority of the requesting Party to the Ministry of Justice or other competent authority of the requested Party. A State wishing to designate another competent authority than the Ministry of Justice shall notify the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of its competent authority at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, as well as of any subsequent changes relating to its competent authority.
	2 The request shall be supported by: 
	a a copy of the conviction and sentence or detention order immediately enforceable or of the warrant of arrest or other order having the same effect and issued in accordance with the procedure laid down in the law of the requesting Party;
	b a statement of the offences for which extradition is requested. The time and place of their commission, their legal descriptions and a reference to the relevant legal provisions, including provisions relating to lapse of time, shall be set out as accurately as possible; and
	c a copy of the relevant enactments or, where this is not possible, a statement of the relevant law and as accurate a description as possible of the person claimed, together with any other information which will help to establish his or her identity, nationality and location.”
	2 Article 5 of the Second Additional Protocol to the Convention shall not apply as between Parties to the present Protocol.
	Article 3 – Rule of speciality
	Article 14 of the Convention shall be replaced by the following provisions:
	“Rule of speciality
	1 A person who has been extradited shall not be arrested, prosecuted, tried, sentenced or detained with a view to the carrying out of a sentence or detention order, nor shall he or she be for any other reason restricted in his or her personal freedom for any offence committed prior to his or her surrender other than that for which he or she was extradited, except in the following cases: 
	
	a when the Party which surrendered him or her consents. A request for consent shall be submitted, accompanied by the documents mentioned in Article 12 and a legal record of any statement made by the extradited person in respect of the offence concerned. Consent shall be given when the offence for which it is requested is itself subject to extradition in accordance with the provisions of this Convention. The decision shall be taken as soon as possible and no later than 90 days after receipt of the request for consent. Where it is not possible for the requested Party to comply with the period provided for in this paragraph, it shall inform the requesting Party, providing the reasons for the delay and the estimated time needed for the decision to be taken; 
	
	b when that person, having had an opportunity to leave the territory of the Party to which he or she has been surrendered, has not done so within 30 days of his or her final discharge, or has returned to that territory after leaving it. 
	
	2 The requesting Party may, however:
	a carry out pre-trial investigations, except for measures restricting the personal freedom of the person concerned; 
	
	b take any measures necessary under its law, including proceedings by default, to prevent any legal effects of lapse of time; 
	
	c take any measures necessary to remove the person from its territory.
	3 Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession or at any later time, declare that, by derogation from paragraph 1, a requesting Party which has made the same declaration may, when a request for consent is submitted pursuant to paragraph1.a, restrict the personal freedom of the extradited person, provided that:
	a the requesting Party notifies, either at the same time as the request for consent pursuant to paragraph 1.a, or later, the date on which it intends to apply such restriction; and 
	
	b the competent authority of the requested Party explicitly acknowledges receipt of this notification. 
	
	The requested Party may express its opposition to that restriction at any time, which shall entail the obligation for the requesting Party to end the restriction immediately, including, where applicable, by releasing the extradited person.
	4 When the description of the offence charged is altered in the course of proceedings, the extradited person shall only be proceeded against or sentenced in so far as the offence under its new description is shown by its constituent elements to be an offence which would allow extradition.”
	Article 4 – Re-extradition to a third State
	The text of Article 15 of the Convention shall become paragraph 1 of that article and shall be supplemented by the following second paragraph: 
	
	“2 The requested Party shall take its decision on the consent referred to in paragraph 1 as soon as possible and no later than 90 days after receipt of the request for consent, and, where applicable, of the documents mentioned in Article 12, paragraph 2. Where it is not possible for the requested Party to comply with the period provided for in this paragraph, it shall inform the requesting Party, providing the reasons for the delay and the estimated time needed for the decision to be taken.”
	Article 5 – Transit
	Article 21 of the Convention shall be replaced by the following provisions:
	“Transit 
	1 Transit through the territory of one of the Contracting Parties shall be granted on submission of a request for transit, provided that the offence concerned is not considered by the Party requested to grant transit as an offence of a political or purely military character having regard to Articles 3 and 4 of this Convention.
	2 The request for transit shall contain the following information: 
	a the identity of the person to be extradited, including his or her nationality or nationalities when available;
	b the authority requesting the transit;
	c the existence of an arrest warrant or other order having the same legal effect or of an enforceable judgment, as well as a confirmation that the person is to be extradited; 
	
	d the nature and legal description of the offence, including the maximum penalty or the penalty imposed in the final judgment; 
	
	e a description of the circumstances in which the offence was committed, including the time, place and degree of involvement of the person sought. 
	
	3 In the event of an unscheduled landing, the requesting Party shall immediately certify that one of the documents mentioned in Article 12, paragraph 2.a exists. This notification shall have the effect of a request for provisional arrest as provided for in Article 16, and the requesting Party shall submit a request for transit to the Party on whose territory this landing has occurred.
	4 Transit of a national, within the meaning of Article 6, of a country requested to grant transit may be refused. 
	
	5 Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, declare that it reserves the right to grant transit of a person only on some or all of the conditions on which it grants extradition. 
	
	6 The transit of the extradited person shall not be carried out through any territory where there is reason to believe that his or her life or freedom may be threatened by reason of his or her race, religion, nationality or political opinion.”
	Article 6 – Channels and means of communication
	The Convention shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 
	“Channels and means of communication
	1 For the purpose of the Convention, communications may be forwarded by using electronic or any other means affording evidence in writing, under conditions which allow the Parties to ascertain their authenticity. In any case, the Party concerned shall, upon request and at any time, submit the originals or authenticated copies of documents. 
	
	2 The use of the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) or of diplomatic channels is not excluded. 
	
	3 Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, declare that, for the purpose of Article12 and Article 14, paragraph 1.a, of the Convention, it reserves the right to require the original or authenticated copy of the request and supporting documents.”
	Article 7 – Relationship with the Convention and other international instruments
	1 The words and expressions used in this Protocol shall be interpreted within the meaning of the Convention. As regards the Parties to this Protocol, the provisions of the Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the extent that they are compatible with the provisions of this Protocol.
	2 The provisions of this Protocol are without prejudice to the application of Article 28, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Convention concerning the relations between the Convention and bilateral or multilateral agreements.
	Article 8 – Friendly settlement
	The Convention shall be supplemented by the following provisions:
	“Friendly settlement
	The European Committee on Crime Problems of the Council of Europe shall be kept informed regarding the application of the Convention and the Additional Protocols thereto and shall do whatever is necessary to facilitate a friendly settlement of any difficulty which may arise out of their interpretation and application.” 
	
	Article 9 – Signature and entry into force
	1 This Protocol shall be open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe which are Parties to or have signed the Convention. It shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A signatory may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol unless it has previously ratified, accepted or approved the Convention, or does so simultaneously. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. 
	
	2 This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the deposit of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval. 
	
	3 In respect of any signatory State which subsequently deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, this Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of deposit. 
	
	Article 10 – Accession
	1 Any non-member State which has acceded to the Convention may accede to this Protocol after it has entered into force. 
	
	2 Such accession shall be effected by depositing an instrument of accession with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. 
	
	3 In respect of any acceding State, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of accession. 
	
	Article 11 – Temporal scope
	This Protocol shall apply to requests received after the entry into force of the Protocol between the Parties concerned.
	Article 12 – Territorial application
	1 Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, specify the territory or territories to which this Protocol shall apply. 
	
	2 Any State may, at any later time, by declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such declaration by the Secretary General. 
	
	3 Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General. 
	
	Article 13 – Declarations and reservations
	1 Reservations made by a State to the provisions of the Convention and the Additional Protocols thereto which are not amended by this Protocol shall also be applicable to this Protocol, unless that State otherwise declares at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. The same shall apply to any declaration made in respect or by virtue of any provision of the Convention and the Additional Protocols thereto. 
	
	2 Reservations and declarations made by a State to any provision of the Convention which is amended by this Protocol shall not be applicable as between the Parties to this Protocol.
	3 No reservation may be made in respect of the provisions of this Protocol, with the exception of the reservations provided for in Article 10, paragraph 3, and Article 21, paragraph 5, of the Convention as amended by this Protocol, and in Article 6, paragraph 3, of this Protocol. Reciprocity may be applied to any reservation made. 
	
	4 Any State may wholly or partially withdraw a reservation or declaration it has made in accordance with this Protocol, by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, which shall become effective as from the date of its receipt. 
	
	Article 14 – Denunciation
	1 Any Party may, in so far as it is concerned, denounce this Protocol by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. 
	
	2 Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. 
	
	3 Denunciation of the Convention automatically entails denunciation of this Protocol. 
	
	Article 15 – Notifications
	The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe and any State which has acceded to this Protocol of: 
	
	a any signature; 
	b the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession; 
	
	c any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 9 and 10; 
	
	d any reservation made in accordance with Article 10, paragraph 3, and Article 21, paragraph 5, of the Convention as amended by this Protocol, as well as Article 6, paragraph3, of this Protocol, and any withdrawal of such a reservation; 
	
	e any declaration made in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 1, and Article 14, paragraph 3, of the Convention as amended by this Protocol, as well as Article 12 of this Protocol, and any withdrawal of such a declaration; 
	
	f any notification received in pursuance of the provisions of Article 14 and the date on which denunciation takes effect; 
	
	g any other act, declaration, notification or communication relating to this Protocol. 
	
	In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol. 
	
	Done at Vienna, this 20th day of September 2012, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe and to the non-member States which have acceded to the Convention.
	ČETVRTI DODATNI PROTOКOL UZ EVROPSКU КONVENCIJU O EКSTRADICIJI
	Beč, 20. septembar 2012. godine
	Države članice Saveta Evrope, potpisnice ovog protokola, 
	Smatrajući da je cilj Saveta Evrope da se ostvari veće jedinstvo između članica;
	U želji jačanja njihovih pojedinačnih i kolektivnih mogućnosti za suprotstavljanje kriminalu;
	S obzirom na odredbe 
	
	Evropske Кonvencije o ekstradiciji (ETS br. 24) koja je otvorena za potpisivanje 13. decembra 1957. godine u Parizu (u daljem tekstu „Кonvencija”), kao i tri dodatna protokola (ETS br 86 i 98, CETS br. 209), sačinjena u Strazburu 15. oktobra 1975. godine, 17. marta 1978. godine i 10. novembra 2010. godine;
	Smatrajući celishodnim da se određene odredbe Кonvencije unaprede i dopune u određenim aspektima, s obzirom na razvoj međunarodne saradnje u krivičnim stvarima, nakon što su Кonvencija i njeni dodatni protokoli stupili na snagu;
	Dogovorile su se o sledećem:
	Član 1 – Zastarelost
	Član 10. Кonvencije se zamenjuje sledećim odredbama:
	„Zastarelost
	1. Izručenje se neće odobriti ako je nastupila zastarelost krivičnog gonjenja ili izvršenja kazne, prema zakonodavstvu strane molilje.
	2. Izručenje se neće odbiti ako bi zastarelost krivičnog gonjenja ili izvršenja kazne nastupila, prema zakonodavstvu zamoljene strane.
	3. Svaka država može, u trenutku potpisivanja ili polaganja svog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju, da izjavi da koristi pravo da ne prihvati stav 2: 
	
	a. kada se molba za izručenje odnosi na krivična dela za koja je ta država nadležna po svom krivičnom zakonu; i/ili
	b. ako domaće zakonodavstvo izričito zabranjuje izručenje u slučaju nastupanja zastarelosti krivičnog gonjenja ili izvršenja kazne, prema njenom zakonodavstvu.
	4. Prilikom utvrđivanja da li je, prema domaćem zakonodavstvu, nastupila zastarelost krivičnog gonjenja ili izvršenja kazne, svaka strana koja je dala izjavu, u skladu sa stavom 3. ovog člana, će uzeti u obzir, u skladu sa domaćim zakonom, sve radnje i događaje koji su se desili na teritoriji strane molilje, u meri u kojoj te radnje ili događaji iste vrste utiču na prekid ili obustavu zastarelosti na teritoriji zamoljene strane.”
	Član 2 – Molba i dokazi
	1. Član 12. Кonvencije se zamenjuje sledećim odredbama:
	„Molba i dokazi
	1. Molba se sačinjava u pisanoj formi. Molbu upućuje Ministarstvo pravde ili drugi nadležni organ strane molilje Ministarstvu pravde ili drugom nadležnom organu zamoljene strane. Država koja želi da odredi neki drugi nadležni organ umesto Ministarstva pravde će o tome obavestiti Generalnog sekretara Saveta Evrope u trenutku potpisivanja ili polaganja svog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju, kao i o svim naknadnim promenama nadležnog organa.
	2. Molbi se prilažu:
	a. kopija odluke o osudi i kazni ili naloga za pritvaranje koji može odmah da se izvrši ili naloga za hapšenje ili drugog naloga koji ima isto dejstvo i koji je izdat u skladu sa postupkom propisanim zakonom strane molilje;
	b. opis krivičnih dela zbog kojih se izručenje traži, vreme i mesto izvršenja dela, pravna kvalifikacija, tekst zakonskih odredaba koje se na njih odnose, uključujući odredbe koje se odnose na zastarelost, koji se moraju navesti što je moguće preciznije;
	v. prepis zakonskih odredaba koje se primenjuju na dela ili, u slučaju da to nije moguće, izjavu o pravu koje se primenjuje, kao i što precizniji opis lica koje se traži i svako drugo obaveštenje pogodno za utvrđivanje njegovog identiteta, državljanstva i mesta boravišta.”
	2. Član 5. Drugog dodatnog protokola uz Кonvenciju se neće primenjivati između strana ugovornica ovog protokola.
	Član 3 – Pravilo specijalnosti
	Član 14. Кonvencije se zamenjuje sledećim odredbama:
	„Pravilo specijalnosti
	1. Izručeno lice neće biti lišeno slobode, krivično gonjeno, suđeno, osuđeno ili pritvoreno radi izvršenja odluke o kazni ili naloga za pritvaranje, niti podvrgnuto bilo kakvom drugom obliku ograničenja lične slobode za bilo koje delo učinjeno pre predaje, a koje nije predmet izručenja, osim u sledećim slučajevima:
	a. ako strana koja ga je izručila na to pristane. U tu svrhu biće podnet zahtev za davanje saglasnosti sa prilozima predviđenim u članu 12. i sudski zapisnik sa izjavom izručenog lica, koja se odnosi na predmetna krivična dela. Ovaj pristanak će se dati u slučaju da krivično delo za koje se traži može biti predmet izručenja na osnovu ove konvencije. Odluka će biti doneta u što kraćem roku, a najkasnije 90 dana nakon prijema zahteva za davanje saglasnosti. Ukoliko zamoljena strana nije u mogućnosti da ispoštuje rok iz ovog stava, ona će o tome obavestiti stranu molilju, navodeći razloge za odlaganje i vreme potrebno za donošenje te odluke; 
	
	b. ako izručeno lice, iako je imalo mogućnosti, nije napustilo teritoriju strane kojoj je bilo predato u roku od 30 dana od njegovog konačnog puštanja iz zatvora, ili se na nju ponovo vratilo.
	2. Međutim, strana molilja može:
	a. da sprovodi istragu, izuzimajući mere kojima se ograničava lična sloboda tog lica;
	b. da preduzima neophodne mere u skladu sa svojim zakonom, uključujući i suđenje u odsustvu, radi sprečavanja nastupanja pravnih posledica zastarelosti;
	v. da preduzima neophodne mere radi vraćanja tog lica sa svoje teritorije.
	3. Svaka država može, u trenutku potpisivanja ili polaganja svog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju ili naknadno, izjaviti da, pored slučajeva iz stava 1, strana molilja koja je dala istu izjavu može, kada je zahtev za davanje saglasnosti podnet u skladu sa stavom 1. tačka a, ograničiti ličnu slobodu izručenog lica, pod uslovom da: 
	
	a. strana molilja u trenutku predaje zahteva za davanje saglasnosti u skladu sa stavom 1. tačka a ili kasnije, obavesti o datumu početka ograničenja; 
	
	b. nadležni organ zamoljene strane izričito potvrdi prijem ovog obaveštenja.
	Zamoljena strana u bilo koje vreme može izraziti nesaglasnost sa tim ograničenjem, čime će strana molilja biti obavezana i obustaviti ograničenje, uz puštanje na slobodu izručenog lica, kada je to moguće. 
	
	4. Кada se opis dela koje je predmet optužbe, promeni u toku krivičnog postupka, izručeno lice će biti procesuirano ili osuđeno, ako se to delo po svojim konstitutivnim elementima i prema novom opisu može smatrati delom za koje je izručenje moguće.”
	Član 4 – Izručenje u korist treće države
	Tekst člana 15. Кonvencije postaje stav 1. ovog člana i dodaje se sledeći stav koji glasi:
	„2. Zamoljena strana će doneti odluku o davanju saglasnosti iz stava 1. u što kraćem roku, a najkasnije 90 dana od dana prijema zahteva za davanje saglasnosti, odnosno prijema dokumenata iz člana 12. stav 2. Кada zamoljena strana nije u mogućnosti da postupi u roku iz ovog stava, o tome će obavestiti stranu molilju, navodeći razloge za odlaganje i vreme potrebno za donošenje te odluke.”
	Član 5 – Tranzit 
	Član 21. Кonvencije zamenjuje se sledećim odredbama:
	„Tranzit
	1. Tranzit preko teritorije jedne od strana ugovornica odobriće se na zahtev, pod uslovom da se ne radi o krivičnom delu za koje zamoljena strana za tranzit smatra da je političke ili čisto vojne prirode imajući u vidu čl. 3. i 4. ove konvencije.
	2. Zahtev za tranzit sadrži sledeće podatke:
	a. identitet lica koje se izručuje, uključujući državljanstvo ili više državljanstava kada je to slučaj;
	b. organ koji traži tranzit;
	v. nalog za hapšenje ili drugi nalog sa istim pravnim dejstvom ili izvršna presuda, kao i potvrda da će to lice biti izručeno;
	g. vrsta i opis krivičnog dela, uključujući maksimalnu kaznu ili kaznu koja je izrečena u pravnosnažnoj presudi;
	d. opis okolnosti u kojima je krivično delo izvršeno, uključujući vreme, mesto i stepen krivične odgovornosti lica čije izručenje se traži.
	3. U slučaju neplaniranog sletanja, strana molilja će odmah potvrditi postojanje jednog od dokumenata iz člana 12. stav 2. tačka a. Ta potvrda će se smatrati zahtevom za privremeno pritvaranje iz člana 16, i strana molilja će predati zahtev za tranzit državi na čijoj teritoriji je došlo do sletanja.
	4. Tranzit državljanina države zamoljene za tranzit, u smislu člana 6. može da bude odbijen. 
	
	5. Međutim, svaka država može da izjavi prilikom potpisivanja ove konvencije ili polaganja instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju, da će odobriti tranzit nekog lica samo pod istim uslovima koji važe za izručenje ili pod nekim od ovih uslova. 
	
	6. Tranzit izručenog lica neće se vršiti preko bilo koje teritorije, ako postoji verovatnoća da bi na njoj mogao biti ugrožen njegov život ili sloboda zbog rasne pripadnosti, vere, državljanstva ili političkih ubeđenja.” 
	
	Član 6 – Кanali i sredstva komunikacije
	Кonvencija se dopunjuje sledećim odredbama:
	„Кanali i sredstva komunikacije
	1. U smislu ove konvencije, komunikacija se može obavljati elektronskim ili nekim drugim putem, kojim će se proslediti pismeni dokazi, u skladu sa uslovima koji stranama omogućuju da utvrde verodostojnost. Jedna strana će na zahtev druge strane i u svakom trenutku, dostaviti originale ili overene kopije dokumenata. 
	
	2. Učešće Međunarodne organizacije kriminalističke policije (Interpol) ili diplomatskih kanala nije isključeno. 
	
	3. Svaka država može, u trenutku potpisivanja ili polaganja svog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju, da stavi rezervu u vezi sa čl. 12. i 14. stav 1. tačka a. ove konvencije, da traži original ili overenu kopiju molbe i propratne dokumentacije.” 
	
	Član 7 – Odnos sa Кonvencijom i drugim međunarodnim instrumentima
	1. Reči i izrazi koji se koriste u ovom protokolu tumače se u smislu Кonvencije. Кada je reč o stranama ugovornicama ovog protokola, odredbe Кonvencije se, mutatis mutandis, primenjuju u meri u kojoj su kompatibilne sa odredbama ovog protokola.
	2. Odredbe ovog protokola ni na koji način ne utiču na primenu člana 28. st. 2. i 3. Кonvencije u vezi sa odnosima između Кonvencije i bilateralnih ili multilateralnih ugovora.
	Član 8 – Mirno rešavanje
	Кonvencija se dopunjuje sledećim odredbama:
	„Mirno rešavanje
	Evropski Кomitet za krivična pitanja Saveta Evrope biće obaveštavan o primeni Кonvencije i njenih dodatnih protokola i učiniće sve što je neophodno radi omogućavanja mirnog rešavanja bilo kog spora koji može da proistekne u vezi sa njihovim tumačenjem i primenom.”
	Član 9 – Potpis i stupanje na snagu
	1. Ovaj protokol je otvoren za potpisivanje državama članicama Saveta Evrope koje su strane ugovornice Кonvencije ili su potpisale Кonvenciju. On podleže potvrđivanju, prihvatanju ili odobravanju. Potpisnica ne može da potvrdi, prihvati ili odobri ovaj protokol ako prethodno nije potvrdila, prihvatila ili odobrila Кonvenciju, ili ako to istovremeno ne učini. Instrumenti o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju ili odobravanju polažu se kod Generalnog sekretara Saveta Evrope.
	2. Ovaj protokol stupa na snagu prvog dana u mesecu nakon isteka perioda od tri meseca posle polaganja trećeg instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju ili odobravanju. 
	
	3. U odnosu na svaku državu potpisnicu koja kasnije položi svoj instrument o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju ili odobravanju, ovaj protokol stupa na snagu prvog dana u mesecu nakon isteka perioda od tri meseca od datuma polaganja.
	Član 10 – Pristupanje
	1. Svaka država koja nije članica, a pristupila je Кonvenciji, može da pristupi ovom protokolu posle njegovog stupanja na snagu.
	2. Takvo pristupanje se vrši polaganjem instrumenata o pristupanju kod Generalnog sekretara Saveta Evrope.
	3. U odnosu na svaku državu koja mu pristupa, ovaj protokol stupa na snagu prvog dana u mesecu nakon isteka perioda od tri meseca od datuma polaganja instrumenta o pristupanju.
	Član 11 – Vremensko važenje
	Ovaj protokol će se primenjivati na zahteve koji budu primljeni nakon stupanja na snagu Protokola između strana ugovornica.
	Član 12 – Teritorijalna primena
	1. Svaka država može, prilikom potpisivanja ili polaganja svog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju, da naznači teritoriju ili teritorije na kojima se ovaj protokol primenjuje.
	2. Svaka država može, u bilo kom kasnijem trenutku, izjavom upućenom Generalnom sekretaru Saveta Evrope, da proširi primenu ovog protokola na bilo koju drugu teritoriju naznačenu u izjavi. U odnosu na tu teritoriju Protokol stupa na snagu prvog dana u mesecu posle isteka perioda od tri meseca nakon datuma kada je Generalni sekretar tu izjavu primio.
	3. Svaka izjava data u skladu sa dva prethodna stava može da se, u odnosu na bilo koju teritoriju naznačenu u njoj, povuče na osnovu obaveštenja upućenom Generalnom sekretaru Saveta Evrope. Povlačenje proizvodi dejstvo prvog dana u mesecu posle isteka perioda od šest meseci nakon datuma kada je Generalni sekretar takvo obaveštenje primio. 
	
	Član 13 – Izjave i rezerve
	1. Rezerve koje je neka država stavila na bilo koju odredbu Кonvencije i njenih dodatnih protokola, koje nisu izmenjene ovim protokolom, primenjuju se i na ovaj protokol, osim ukoliko država izjavi drugačije u trenutku potpisivanja ili prilikom polaganja instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju. Isto to važi za svaku izjavu datu u odnosu na bilo koju odredbu ili shodno bilo kojoj odredbi Кonvencije ili njenih dodatnih protokola.
	2. Rezerve i izjave stavljene od strane države na bilo koju odredbu Кonvencije koja je izmenjena ovim protokolom neće se primenjivati između strana ugovornica ovog protokola.
	3. Na odredbe ovog protokola ne mogu se staviti rezerve, osim rezervi iz člana 10. stav 3. i člana 21. stav 5. Кonvencije, kako predviđa ovaj protokol i članu 6. stav 3. ovog protokola. Uzajamnost se može primeniti u vezi sa svakom stavljenom rezervom.
	4. Svaka država može u celosti ili delimično da povuče rezervu ili izjavu koju je dala u skladu sa ovim protokolom, putem izjave upućene Generalnom sekretaru Saveta Evrope, koja stupa na snagu danom prijema.
	Član 14 – Otkazivanje
	1. Svaka strana ugovornica može, ako je to u njenom interesu, da otkaže ovaj protokol slanjem obaveštenja Generalnom sekretaru Saveta Evrope.
	2. Otkazivanje proizvodi dejstvo prvog dana u mesecu po isteku perioda od šest meseci nakon datuma kada je Generalni sekretar Saveta Evrope primio obaveštenje.
	3. Otkazivanje Кonvencije automatski podrazumeva i otkazivanje ovog protokola.
	Član 15 – Obaveštenja
	Generalni sekretar Saveta Evrope obaveštava države članice Saveta Evrope i svaku državu koja je pristupila ovom protokolu o:
	a. svakom potpisivanju;
	b. polaganju svakog instrumenta o potvrđivanju, prihvatanju, odobravanju ili pristupanju;
	v. svakom datumu stupanja na snagu ovog protokola u skladu sa čl. 9. i 10;
	g. svakoj rezervi stavljenoj u skladu sa članom 10. stav 3. i članom 21. stav 5. Кonvencije izmenjenim ovim protokolom, kao i članom 6. stav 3. ovog protokola, i o svakom povlačenju takve rezerve;
	d. svakoj izjavi datoj u skladu sa članom 12. stav 1. i članom 14. stav 3. Кonvencije izmenjenim ovim protokolom, kao i članom 12. ovog protokola, i o svakom povlačenju takve izjave; 
	
	đ. svakom obaveštenju dobijenom u skladu sa članom 14. i o datumu kada to otkazivanje proizvodi dejstvo;
	e. bilo kom drugom postupku, izjavi, obaveštenju ili saopštenju i vezi sa ovim protokolom.
	U potvrdu navedenog su dolepotpisani, propisno ovlašćeni u tom cilju, potpisali ovaj protokol.
	Sačinjeno u Beču, dana 20. septembra 2012. godine na engleskom i francuskom jeziku, pri čemu su oba teksta podjednako verodostojna, u po jednom primerku koji se polažu u arhivu Saveta Evrope. Generalni sekretar Saveta Evrope dostavlja overene kopije svakoj državi članici Saveta Evrope i državama koje nisu članice, a pristupile su Кonvenciji.”
	Član 3.
	O izvršavanju ovog protokola stara se ministarstvo nadležno za pravosuđe. 
	
	Član 4.
	Ovaj zakon stupa na snagu osmog dana od dana objavljivanja u „Službenom glasniku Republike Srbije – Međunarodni ugovori.”

